feat: rewrite Operate API auth guide (#4138)
camunda/camunda-docs: docs/apis-tools/operate-api/authentication.md

description: "Authentication requirements for accessing the Operate REST API."
---

All Operate REST API requests require authentication.

## Authentication for SaaS

> ### Authentication via JWT access token

Reviewer: Non-blocking change (NBC): Not sure if we should spell out "JSON Web Token (JWT)", I guess by this point the audience know this and the docs may have already spelled it out?

Author: I like this addition. Do you think it is also worth linking to something like https://jwt.io/introduction/ to give more context for people who've never worked with token-based authentication before?

Author: oh, this is on a deleted line. I am going to spell them out and link to a resource in the first mention of them instead.

> All Operate REST API requests require authentication. To authenticate, generate a JWT token and pass it in each request.

Author: ```suggestion
All Operate REST API requests require authentication. To authenticate, generate a [JSON Web Token (JWT)](https://jwt.io/introduction/) and pass it in each request.
```

## Generating a token

<Tabs groupId="authentication" defaultValue="saas" queryString values={
[
{label: 'SaaS', value: 'saas' },
{label: 'Self-Managed', value: 'self-managed' },
]}>
<TabItem value='saas'>

1. [Create client credentials](/guides/setup-client-connection-credentials.md) in the **Clusters > Cluster name > API** tab of [Camunda Console](https://console.camunda.io/).
2. Add permissions to this client for **Operate**.

> 3. Upon creating the client, capture the following values required to generate a token:

Reviewer: NBC: "When" instead of "upon"?

Author: I actually changed this from when to upon, because it felt wrong. You see the values _as soon as you're done_ creating the client. I didn't like "after," because it implies that you can go back and get the values later (which you can't do). 

Is there a different word to use here?

Reviewer: "Once"[you have created...] implies straight after
"After" has less emphasis on it being straight after
"When" implies during the process
I guess then it should be after or once, but once is a hurdle in translation as it can also mean numerically. So perhaps we can use "Once" for now, and if translation becomes a thing, we know to revisit this phrasing?

Reviewer: So it could be: Once you have created the client, capture...

   <!-- this comment convinces the markdown processor to still treat the table as a table, but without adding surrounding paragraphs. 🤷 -->
   | Name                     | Environment variable name        | Default value                                |
   | ------------------------ | -------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------- |
   | Client ID                | `ZEEBE_CLIENT_ID`                | -                                            |
   | Client Secret            | `ZEEBE_CLIENT_SECRET`            | -                                            |
   | Authorization Server URL | `ZEEBE_AUTHORIZATION_SERVER_URL` | `https://login.cloud.camunda.io/oauth/token` |
   | Audience                 |                                  | `operate.camunda.io`                         |
   | Operate REST Address     | `CAMUNDA_OPERATE_BASE_URL`       | -                                            |
   <!-- this comment convinces the markdown processor to still treat the table as a table, but without adding surrounding paragraphs. 🤷 -->

>    :::tip

Reviewer: NBC: Should this be a caution instead of a tip as it is quite important as they cannot get the secret again if they don't copy it now.

Author: I don't feel strongly either way about this; if you do, let me know and I'll adjust.

   :::
4. Execute an authentication request to the token issuer:
   ```bash
   curl --request POST ${ZEEBE_AUTHORIZATION_SERVER_URL} \
       --header 'Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded' \
       --data-urlencode 'grant_type=client_credentials' \
       --data-urlencode 'audience=operate.camunda.io' \
       --data-urlencode "client_id=${ZEEBE_CLIENT_ID}" \
       --data-urlencode "client_secret=${ZEEBE_CLIENT_SECRET}"
   ```
5. A successful authentication response looks like the following:
   ```json
   {
     "access_token": "<TOKEN>",
     "expires_in": 300,
     "refresh_expires_in": 0,
     "token_type": "Bearer",
     "not-before-policy": 0
   }
   ```
6. Capture the value of the `access_token` property and store it as your token.

</TabItem>

<TabItem value='self-managed'>

1. [Add an M2M application in Identity](/self-managed/identity/user-guide/additional-features/incorporate-applications.md).
2. [Add permissions to this application](/self-managed/identity/user-guide/additional-features/incorporate-applications.md) for **Operate API**.
3. Capture the `Client ID` and `Client Secret` from the application in Identity.

> 4. [Generate a token](/self-managed/identity/user-guide/authorizations/generating-m2m-tokens.md) to access the REST API. Provide the `client_id` and `client_secret` from the values you captured in Identity.

Reviewer: NBC: "you previously captured"

Author: ```suggestion
4. [Generate a token](/self-managed/identity/user-guide/authorizations/generating-m2m-tokens.md) to access the REST API. Provide the `client_id` and `client_secret` from the values you previously captured in Identity.
```

Author: @mesellings (I ask this in a totally not condescending way, and if it comes across that way I'm sorry) - are you aware of the "Add suggestion" button in GitHub? 

<img width="680" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7a4d1ffa-6838-44ed-9270-0a90e85ee2ee">

For changes like this, it is helpful to add an inline suggestion with that button. Once the suggestion is there (as in my previous comment), it can be committed via the GitHub UI instead of having to find the right location in an editor locally.

Reviewer: Yes I am aware, but don't always use it - you're right though, will use it more often in cases like this 👍 😄

   ```shell
   curl --location --request POST 'http://localhost:18080/auth/realms/camunda-platform/protocol/openid-connect/token' \
   --header 'Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded' \
   --data-urlencode "client_id=${CLIENT_ID}" \
   --data-urlencode "client_secret=${CLIENT_SECRET}" \
   --data-urlencode 'grant_type=client_credentials'
   ```
5. A successful authentication response looks like the following:
   ```json
   {
     "access_token": "<TOKEN>",
     "expires_in": 300,
     "refresh_expires_in": 0,
     "token_type": "Bearer",
     "not-before-policy": 0
   }
   ```
6. Capture the value of the `access_token` property and store it as your token.

> See the [Operate Configuration - Authentication](/self-managed/operate-deployment/operate-authentication.md#identity) documentation for more information about this authentication method.

Reviewer: NBC: Perhaps:

For more information about this authentication method, see [Operate...].

Remove "documentation".

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

## Using a token

> Send the captured token as an authorization header in each request: `Authorization: Bearer <TOKEN>`.

Reviewer: NBC: Perhaps

Include the captured...

> Send the captured token as an authorization header in each request: `Authorization: Bearer <TOKEN>`.

Author: ```suggestion
Include the captured token as an authorization header in each request: `Authorization: Bearer <TOKEN>`.
```

> For example, to call the Operate REST API's ["Search process instances" endpoint](./specifications/search-1.api.mdx), make the following request against the target Operate environment:

Reviewer: NBC: Should we use "make", is "send" better?

> For example, to call the Operate REST API's ["Search process instances" endpoint](./specifications/search-1.api.mdx), make the following request against the target Operate environment:

Author: ```suggestion
For example, to call the Operate REST API's ["Search process instances" endpoint](./specifications/search-1.api.mdx), send the following request against the target Operate environment:
```

Yes, it's definitely a more precise verb.

<Tabs groupId="using-a-token" defaultValue="saas" queryString values={
[
{label: 'SaaS', value: 'saas' },
{label: 'Self-Managed', value: 'self-managed' },
]}>

<TabItem value='saas'>

:::tip

> The URL of the Operate REST API, represented below by the `${CAMUNDA_OPERATE_BASE_URL}` variable, can be captured when creating an API client. It can also be constructed as `https://${REGION}.operate.camunda.io/${CLUSTER_ID}`.

Reviewer: NBC: Change passive voice > active voice

You can capture the URL of the Operate REST API when creating an API client. This is represented below....variable. It can...

> The URL of the Operate REST API, represented below by the `${CAMUNDA_OPERATE_BASE_URL}` variable, can be captured when creating an API client. It can also be constructed as `https://${REGION}.operate.camunda.io/${CLUSTER_ID}`.

Author: ```suggestion
The `${CAMUNDA_OPERATE_BASE_URL}` variable below represents the URL of the Operate REST API. You can capture this URL when creating an API client. You can also construct it as `https://${REGION}.operate.camunda.io/${CLUSTER_ID}`.
```

ok I changed your suggestion a bit, let me know what you think. I felt it was important to minimize the distance between the two suggested places to get that value. In other words: 

"X is Y. You can do X with A or B." > "You can do X with A. X is Y. Instead of A you can do B."

{label: 'Self-Managed', value: 'self-managed' },
]}>

<TabItem value='saas'>

:::tip
The URL of the Operate REST API, represented below by the `${CAMUNDA_OPERATE_BASE_URL}` variable, can be captured when creating an API client. It can also be constructed as `https://${REGION}.operate.camunda.io/${CLUSTER_ID}`.
:::

> The following settings are needed to request a token:

Reviewer: NBC: Edit

To request a token, the following settings are required:

</TabItem>

| Name                     | Description                                     | Default value        |
| ------------------------ | ----------------------------------------------- | -------------------- |
| client id                | Name of your registered client                  | -                    |
| client secret            | Password for your registered client             | -                    |
| audience                 | Permission name; if not given use default value | `operate.camunda.io` |
| authorization server url | Token issuer server                             | -                    |
<TabItem value='self-managed'>

:::note

> For more information on how to get these values for Camunda 8, read [Manage API Clients](/components/console/manage-clusters/manage-api-clients.md).

Reviewer: NBC: "see" instead of "read"?

```json
{
  "items": [],
  "sortValues": [123456],
  "total": 0
}
```

## Token expiration

Access tokens expire according to the `expires_in` property of a successful authentication response. After this duration, in seconds, a new access token must be requested.

> ## Authentication via cookie (Self-Managed only)

Reviewer 2: ❓ This is the only API that has docs about cookie auth, which feels suspicious.

Author: My assumption is that this exists for a reason, but I've started a conversation at https://camunda.slack.com/archives/C9B5270DA/p1724352947450009 to hopefully get more clarity.

> Another way to access the Operate API in a Self-Managed cluster is to send cookie headers in each request. The cookie can be obtained by using the API endpoint `/api/login`. Take the steps in the following example:

Reviewer: NBC: Change to

You can also access the Operate API in a Self-Managed cluster by sending cookie headers in each request. You can obtain a cookie using the `/api/login` API endpoint. For example:

Author: ```suggestion
You can also access the Operate API in a Self-Managed cluster by sending cookie headers in each request. You can obtain a cookie using the /api/login API endpoint. For example:
```

     "expires_in": 300,
     "refresh_expires_in": 0,
     "token_type": "Bearer",
     "not-before-policy": 0
   }
   ```
6. Capture the value of the `access_token` property and store it as your token.

See the [Operate Configuration - Authentication](/self-managed/operate-deployment/operate-authentication.md#identity) documentation for more information about this authentication method.

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

## Using a token

Include the captured token as an authorization header in each request: `Authorization: Bearer <TOKEN>`.

For example, to call the Operate REST API's ["Search process instances" endpoint](./specifications/search-1.api.mdx), send the following request against the target Operate environment:

<Tabs groupId="using-a-token" defaultValue="saas" queryString values={
[
{label: 'SaaS', value: 'saas' },
{label: 'Self-Managed', value: 'self-managed' },
]}>

<TabItem value='saas'>

:::tip
The `${CAMUNDA_OPERATE_BASE_URL}` variable below represents the URL of the Operate REST API. You can capture this URL when creating an API client. You can also construct it as `https://${REGION}.operate.camunda.io/${CLUSTER_ID}`.
:::

</TabItem>

<TabItem value='self-managed'>

:::tip

> The URL of the Operate REST API, represented below by the `${CAMUNDA_OPERATE_BASE_URL}` variable, is configured in your Self-Managed installation. The default value is `http://localhost:8081`.

Author: ```suggestion
The `${CAMUNDA_OPERATE_BASE_URL}` variable below represents the URL of the Operate REST API. You can configure this value in your Self-Managed installation. The default value is `http://localhost:8081`.
```

:::

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

```shell
curl --request POST ${CAMUNDA_OPERATE_BASE_URL}/v1/process-instances/search \
   --header "Authorization: Bearer ${TOKEN}" \
   --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
   --data-raw '{}'
```

A successful response would include [matching process instances](./specifications/search-1.api.mdx). For example:

```json
{
  "items": [],
  "sortValues": [123456],
  "total": 0
}
```

## Token expiration

> Access tokens expire according to the `expires_in` property of a successful authentication response. After this duration, in seconds, a new access token must be requested.

Author: ```suggestion
Access tokens expire according to the `expires_in` property of a successful authentication response. After this duration, in seconds, you must request a new access token.
```

1. Log in as user 'demo' and store the cookie in the file `cookie.txt`.

```shell
curl --request POST 'http://localhost:8080/api/login?username=demo&password=demo' \
   --cookie-jar cookie.txt
```

> 2. Send the cookie (as a header) in each API request. In this case, request all process definitions.

Reviewer: NBC: Does it need brackets?

Send the cookie as a header in each...

Author: ```suggestion
2. Send the cookie as a header in each API request. In this case, request all process definitions.
```
